---
title: "The Importance of Forest Biodiversity"
date: 2021-03-02T12:49:27+06:00
featureImage: images/blog/forest.jpg
postImage: images/blog/forest.jpg
tags: environment
categories: blog
# toc: true
---


World Wildlife Day is on the 3rd of March and it's important to understand why we have to remind people annually of the importance of forests which serves as the home for wildlife. 


## What is Forest Biodiversity and Why is it Important?

Forests cover about 30% of the planet’s land surface and with the demise of forests from fires and deforestation, the numbers are continuously going down.  If these numbers keep up, rainforests will be gone in 80 years or so.

Forest biodiversity refers to the diverse life forms in the forests. This includes all trees, plants, animals, insects, birds, fishes, and even fungi.

<!-- ## Why Is Biodiversity Important In Forests? -->



Trees help conserve soil and water. They also provide shelter to birds and other life forms. They also clean the air by removing pollutants, giving oxygen, and captures carbon dioxide before it becomes a greenhouse gas. Dwindling trees from logging and land conversion affects the watershed and groundwater. 

The recent forest fires in Amazon and Australia affected many things, including air quality, weather patterns, health issues, even the mental health of people affected by these fires. 

Moreover, trees provide food and medicine, helps dissipate heat, and shelter for animals. It also provides construction materials and is a huge source of income for inhabitants near the forest.

Our friends at Superphysics advocate [massive reforestation and affortestation](https://www.superphysics.org/material/solutions/global-warming) to mitigate climate change. 


### Animals and Birds

Animals occupy different trophic levels. Each trophic level is important to keep a healthy number within a species population. Taking the predators, the snake, for example, throws that ecosystem into an imbalance. This ecological imbalance results in the population explosion of undesirable species, like rats, that become pests to households and agricultural crops. Even herbivores prevent the overgrowth of grasses and other vegetation, help in the pollination process, and introduce new species in new areas. 

Birds do the same by cleaning up for the dead carcasses left by predators, keeps marshes and coral reefs alive, control the pest population, and pollinate plants.  

### Insects

Insects serve as food for higher animals like birds, anteaters, etc. They also help in the decomposition process of animal manure, control pests (integrated pest management for organic agriculture), pollinate flowering plants and adds nutrients to the soil. When trees in forests are felled impudently, these insects lost their natural habitat, affecting their main functions in the environment. 

### Mushrooms and Lichen

Mushrooms and lichen help in the decomposition process, nutrient cycling, soil formation, and nitrogen-fixation. Lichens are sensitive to polluted air so dead lichens indicate polluted air.



## How Can We Protect Forest Biodiversity?

### Protect wildlife habitat

Protecting the forests is the topmost priority for protecting biodiversity. Every tree and plant in the forest hosts its inhabitants and if one of the host plants or trees becomes endangered or goes extinct, the species living in them are affected. Some animals like chipmunks, deer, woodpeckers, squirrels, and even black bears love pine trees and their relatives, mostly as a source of food. In the Philippine setting, many birds, mammals, and forest frogs are on the endangered list because of forest degradation.

<!-- collage of ways to protect the forest biodiversity -->

### Limit introducing new species

Introduced species can become invasive and affect endemic species population if left unchecked. A few rodents, lizards, frogs, fish, and birds were introduced to the Philippine ecosystem, both accidentally by trading ships or intentionally as alternative food items, but later displaced the endemic species in the area.

### Reduce pollution

Pollution is one of the top reasons for the demise of our forests and their inhabitants. Air pollution from factories, coal-fired power plants, and daily activities all add up and cause acid rain. One study conducted by the USDA documents how air pollution poses great threats to our forests 1  A similar study in the US shows that the discoloration of leaves in trees, both in forests, plains, and urban areas shows environmental stress, one of which is pollution 2

Improper waste management results in soil and water pollution. Soil contamination affects the proper growth of plants and trees in forests.     

Practice sustainable harvesting practices
Trees and plants in the forests can be harvested as done sustainably. This means that for every tree cut down, more trees should be planted. Establish a protected area/no-harvest zone before any cutting of trees. It is also good to protect high conservation value forests because of the diversity it supports. A good environmental management plan is necessary to practice sustainable harvesting. 

Sustainable harvesting includes forest products like rattan, spices, grasses used for papermaking and broom-making, fruits, and honey. 

### Stop habitat fragmentation

Habitat fragmentation is the division of wildlife habitat into smaller, fragmented areas, usually with massive human interaction. Communities in the US and Australia reported sightings of coyotes, foxes, deer, and birds. When forests get fragmented, either by human intervention or by natural occurrences, wildlife goes haywire, losing their natural habitat and disoriented from all the changes. 

## What Can We Do?

Here are some small things we can do to prevent the destruction of our forests and the wildlife in them. 

- Plant more trees.
- Reuse and recycle paper and other products derived from forest products.
- Practice proper waste management.
- Support forest-friendly products. 
- Support climate change campaigns.
