---
title: "What is Geological Surveying?"
date: 2022-01-01T12:49:27+06:00
featureImage: /horiz/survey.jpg
postImage: /horiz/survey.jpg
tags: surveying
categories: blog
---

dumptrucks.jpg

Geological surveying is the systematic investigation of the geology beneath a piece of land. It is used to create a geological map or model. 

This model can then be used for exploration, land-use planning, water resource assessment, geohazard and many others. 


## Assessment of silica fields for quarrying

Assessment of silica fields for quarrying for industrial and medical use in Doña Remedios Trinidad, Bulacan

{{< blogsection image="images/single-blog/blog-img.jpg" title="Mineral Resource Assessment" >}}

Mineral Resource Assessment takes the identification, surveys, and development of minerals as part of the supply for the continuing "Build-Build-Build" infrastructure program of the Duterte Administration. The demand for rock and aggregates, armor rocks, limestone, silica and shale continues to increase to keep up with the demands of the construction industry.

{{< /blogsection >}}


## Disaster Mitigation

Disasters can be prevented if urban planners adhere to the recommendations made by surveyors before constructing high-rise buildings, establishing communities, and before starting a mining operation.

HIMALAYAN ASIA has an expert team to conduct surveys and permitting leading to responsible quarry operation. 

Basalt for Rocks and Aggregates and Armor Rocks (DRT, Bulacan)

Assessment of silica fields for quarrying for industrial and medical use in Doña Remedios Trinidad, Bulacan

## Geohazard Assessment

A man standing near a debris slide to show its extent
Geohazard studies focus on the major identified geological risk hazards: seismic, volcanic, tsunami, landslide, subsidence, storm, and flooding.

HIMALAYAN ASIA has the expertise to conduct a geological hazard risk identification survey as part of the assessment of any conduct of project activities, such as EGGAR for IEE and EIS, to minimize and mitigate imposing risks and hazards prior to the actual project implementation. 

Geotechnical Assessment
The Geotechnical Studies are conducted using geotechnical drillings beneath the soil, soft and hard rocks to assess the stabilities of the underlying strata for foundations of the project structures.

HIMALAYAN ASIA has a sizable team with instrumentation and machines for any shallow drilling activities to identify subsurface geological and geotechnical profiling for any given Project foundations. 


Bore drilling equipment
Bore Hole Drilling for Soil and Rock Characterizations in Kapai, Lanao del Sur for the establishment of a sanitary landfill

Hydrological Assessment
Coastal resource assessment team showing the extent of coastal beach erosion in San Felipe, Zambales
HIMALAYAN ASIA provides surveys of inland water bodies such as along coastal waters, inlets, rivers, canals, lakes, and ponds. Hydrographic surveys collect information about these bodies of water. The Company deploys equipment onboard small vessels to collect data for use in determining the depth of water, coastal geology, dredge volumes, and beach profiles.

Other Services
A stack of documents on a desk
a group of marine scientists in a banca
Himalayan Asia also processes environmental certifications and related documents leading to the permitting of various businesses. 

HIMALAYAN ASIA also conducts marine environment assessment for establishing marine aquaculture ventures, marine sanctuaries, and others.
