---
title: "Elements of Environmental Planning"
date: 2021-02-09T12:49:27+06:00
featureImage: images/allpost/allPost-7.jpg
postImage: images/single-blog/feature-image.jpg
tags: planning
categories: blog
---



Environmental planning facilitates decision-making to carry out development considering the natural environmental, social, political, economic, and governance factors. It provides a holistic framework to achieve sustainable outcomes.

## Socio-economic Development

Environmental planning is all about its inhabitants. Why do we need to plan if it is just for buildings anyway? 

Socio-economic development means every part of the society is considered, not just the investors but, more importantly, the stakeholders in the affected community. Planning should be transparent and consider even the intangible parts such as safety and freedom. 

With the family being the core of the society, personal safety, convenience, and a stable income source come to the forefront of every household head. A sudden change of residence causes income instability and loss of everything you are accustomed to, which can be difficult for everyone in the family. 

A good community assures you of belongingness and safety, knowing you are with familiar people, especially if you have kids in the family. More than a relocation site and a new source of income, families need assurance and reliability.

## Urban Planning

Urban planning involves responsible use of land space and the design of the urban environment. Water, power, and other resources need careful consideration, so they are not exhausted soon without a plausible replacement. This includes proper infrastructure planning, waste management, pollution control, and strategic planning with proper research and analysis. Sustainability and resilience are the top-level considerations instead of just aesthetics and function. 

Urban planning has become a serious business to every government, and the Philippines responded by professionalizing environmental planners. Republic Act 10587, known as the Environmental Planning Act of 2013, stipulates that environmental planners have responsibilities for keeping companies from committing irreparable mistakes in environmentally critical projects.

Land use is the human use of land. Land use involves the management and modification of natural environment or wilderness into built environment such as settlements and semi-natural habitats such as arable fields, pastures, and managed woods.


## Regional Development

Regional development can encompass both the local and international arena. It can boost domestic development by supporting economic activities in the less-performing regions. Development is no longer centralized, and industrial projects are spread to various regions to encourage industry growth and expand employment opportunities. This is the gist of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) objectives. 

In the local scene, know more about the Philippines’ regional development plans and access the Davao Region’s regional development plan. 


## Natural Resources Management

Natural resources include land, water, soil, plants, and animals. These are all interrelated, and the demise of one results in the demise of all. So, it is important to consider these resources when one is making an environmental plan. 

Natural resources management deals with how people interact with the natural resources to keep them sustainable for the next generations. Studies have projected that demand for food, water, agriculture, residential areas, and construction materials increases every year exponentially. 

Sustainable agriculture, mining, tourism, fisheries, and forestry are on the top rung of priorities for everyone.

## What Can We Do

- Be intentional in your use of water, electricity, etc.
- Stop wasting food by cooking enough what you can eat.
- Be conscious of your choices, especially those that may have huge impacts on the environment.
