---
title: "Sip & Sustain: Water Security For The Philippines"
date: 2024-03-07T12:49:27+06:00
featureImage: images/blog/sip1.jpg
postImage: images/blog/sip3.jpg
tags: events
categories: blog
---



<!-- MARCH 07, 2024 AT NEW WORLD MAKATI -->


Himalayan Asia participates in the event of AmCham Philippines hosting the “Sip & Sustain: Water Security for the Philippines” event on March 7, 2024. 

This gathering brought together esteemed government figures, industry leaders, and Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) to emphasize the critical role of sound water management in achieving a water-secured global community. The event aligned with the theme of “Leveraging Water for Peace” and aimed to address water security challenges in the Philippines.

Key points from the event include:

**1. Water as a Fundamental Human Need**

Access to safe water, sanitation, and hygiene is essential for health and overall well-being. The Philippine government actively engages in advocating for water access and sanitation, aligning with the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 6.

**2. Legislative Initiative**

The Legislative-Executive Development Advisory Council (LEDAC) prioritized the passage of the proposed National Water Resources Act during the 19th Congress. This legislation aims to establish the Department of Water Resources (DWR) and create a national framework for water resource management.

**3. Collaboration for Water Security**

Recognizing that water supply impacts various sectors (agriculture, food and beverage, infrastructure, manufacturing, construction, and domestic use), a collaborative approach involving the government, private sector, and stakeholders is crucial.

**4. AmCham Philippines and Coca-Cola’s Commitment**

AmCham Philippines and Coca-Cola actively advocate for a water-secured Philippines. Their commitment extends to fostering stability and prosperity within the nation by leveraging water resources.

The event facilitated the exchange of ideas, alignment of perspectives, and drafting of documents to contribute significantly to water resource management and improve the quality of life for Filipino communities. This ensures the enduring access to safe and sustainable water remains a priority for future generations.

